Move explorer out of toolchain git repo (#5270)
carbon-language/carbon-lang: proposals/p5270.md

burden. We will move explorer out of the working git repository so that it
remains accessible but is clearly deliniated from the toolchain and is more
clearly frozen or archived.

## Problem

Users have expressed confusion when they come across examples or tests for the
explorer that involve `Main()`, whereas the design and implementation of the
toolchain have moved on to `Run()` as the entry point.

Developers have attempted to update the explorer codebase to fix style guide
issues[^1], as tools like grep or clang-tidy do not differentiate our active
toolchain codebase from the frozen explorer one.

As we update Bazel, Clang, Clang-tidy, etc, we also have to update the explorer
codebase to keep it building cleanly.

As we modify the `//testing` harness, we have to accommodate and work around the
explorer tests[^2][^3][^4].

[^1]: https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5224

[^2]: https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/4979

[^3]: https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5025

[^4]: https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5036

## Background

-   Previous proposal:

>     [p3532: Focus implementation effort on the toolchain](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/proposals/p3532.md)

Reviewer: Note, I think we typically would write #3532 instead of p3532; the "p" prefix is mainly there for the filename, whereas the # prefix reflects GH idioms.

Author: Ah, I was worried about # turning into a github link, but I guess that is the correct link anyway.

-   Kick-off of this discussion
    [#5224](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5224#pullrequestreview-2730512195)
-   Discord discussion:
    [2025-04-02 #explorer](https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/763516049710120960/1356979197070803095)

## Proposal

1. Add a tag `explorer-archived` in the main `carbon-lang` git repository.

> 2. Copy the `//explorer` directory and its dependencies to a new `explorer`

Reviewer: Should `//installers` be included in this, since that's explorer-specific? It's not a dependency of `//explorer`, but it's only there for Compiler Explorer's build of `//explorer`.

Author: Yep, thanks, done. I will also include it in the sibling repo since it exists only for explorer. That way we just preserve whatever we have at head.

> 2. Copy the `//explorer` directory and its dependencies to a new `explorer`
>    repository under the `carbon-language` organization.

Reviewer: Rather than copying the directory to a new repo, you might consider instead cloning the full repository -- getting the full history -- and deleting files/directories that are non-critical. So under that model, both repositories would be the same up to the `explorer-archived` tag, and diverge from there. That'd also help ensure things like the LICENSE file are retained (though maybe most other top-level files aren't needed).

Note though, I'm commenting mainly because the proposal is detailing a specific approach, but maybe it should focus on the goal, e.g.:

```suggestion
2. Create a new `explorer` repository under the `carbon-language` organization that only contains the `//explorer` directory and its dependencies at head.
```

Author: Good points, yes.  Will take your suggestion here.

3. Locally ensure the explorer tests build and pass under the `explorer`
   repository.
4. Add a `README.md` to the `explorer` repository that explains explorer is

>    archived and not under active development.

Reviewer: Suggested step:

```suggestion
   archived and not under active development.
5. Archive the `explorer` repository in GitHub, making it read-only.
```

Author: Done.

> 5. Delete `//explorer` in the main `carbon-lang` repository.

Reviewer: Is Compiler Explorer still building explorer (visible at https://carbon.compiler-explorer.com/z/b61T6n44h)? Maybe something to double-check if you're not sure -- even with the archive repo, might want to just ensure it's turned off.

Author: I am unsure if it's building it still. There's nothing visible in the compiler-explorer git repo that would suggest either way. But since the binary isn't part of the nightly release tarball, and we don't provide a binary of the explorer in some other way, I am guessing that it is still being built.

If this is approved I will kick off a PR with compiler-explorer to remove the carbon-explorer, and that can prompt them to also stop building it.

I've added this as a step.

Reviewer: FWIW, I suspect Chandler's ideal result would be leaving it on Compiler Explorer, just not building new versions.

Reviewer 2: No strong opinion TBH. Whatever is easiest.

Author: Ok I will file an issue with them to discuss it.

Reviewer 3: Hi folks, we're fine with keeping the existing explorer versions. Plus it means old links won't break even though the upstream explorer is gone.

Note that fuzzer test cases from the explorer are already relocated under
`//toolchain/*/fuzzer_corpus/`.

## Rationale

The primary purpose of the explorer codebase at this time is as a demonstration
of past work implementing the carbon language design. This can help to inform
the implementation of the toolchain as it catches up in various areas, as long
as the design has not deviated from the explorer implementation.

Searching in, and providing links to the explorer codebase comes up in design

> discussions occasionally [^5], and we should maintain the ability of toolchain

Reviewer: Note, I really wish we could come up with more than one example use over the past year if we're going to maintain an archive repo. Given the reference's use as GH search rationale, maybe @zygoloid can confirm that he used GH search to find the reference, and that maintaining search is worth a small cost?

Author: Ok, thanks, I found a bunch more, even [one from](https://discord.com/channels/655572317891461132/998959756045713438/1225116234199203860) @geoffromer.

developers to look through the explorer easily. The primary place they do so is

> on github, where the code can be linked to. Github search only works

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on GitHub, where the code can be linked to. GitHub search only works
```

6. Delete `//explorer` and `//installers` in the main `carbon-lang` repository.
7. Archive the `explorer` repository in GitHub, making it read-only.

Note that fuzzer test cases from the explorer are already relocated under
`//toolchain/*/fuzzer_corpus/`.

## Rationale

The primary purpose of the explorer codebase at this time is as a demonstration
of past work implementing the carbon language design. This can help to inform
the implementation of the toolchain as it catches up in various areas, as long
as the design has not deviated from the explorer implementation.

Searching in, and providing links to the explorer codebase comes up in design
discussions occasionally [^5][^6][^7][^8][^9][^10], and we should maintain the
ability of toolchain developers to look through the explorer easily. The primary
place they do so is on GitHub, where the code can be linked to. GitHub search
only works
[on the main branch](https://docs.github.com/en/search-github/github-code-search/understanding-github-code-search-syntax#using-qualifiers)
of a repository, so the `trunk` branch for the `carbon-lang` repository. To
maintain searchability, the explorer codebase must either remain on `trunk` in

> `carbon-lang` or in a sibling repository.

Reviewer 4: Might be worth noting here that github search [does appear to work in archived repositories](https://github.com/search?q=org%3Acarbon-language+InstructionType_conditionalJmpInst&type=code).
